# Translations Builder

Translations Builder is a custom application created with .NET and C#
which can be deployed as an external tool for Power BI Desktop to assist
with the creation and management of dataset translations. which can be
used to build multi-language reports which target the Power BI Service.
This document assumes the reader already understands the fundamentals of
Power BI features for localization. For readers without this background,
it is recommended to read and understand

The Translations Builder application can be used AS IS in a USER CONTEXT
by builders who are creating datasets and report using Power BI Desktop.
You can read through the **Users Guide** to learn to understand the
content in THIS DOC before continuing with this article.

The Translations Builder application can be used in a DEVELOPER CONTEXT
by professional development teams who are creating datasets and report
using Power BI Desktop. You can read through the DEVELOPERS GUIDE.

Power BI provides Internationalization and localization features which
make it possible to build multi-language reports. For example, you can
design a Power BI report that renders in English for some users while
rendering in Spanish, French, German or Dutch for other users. If a
company or organization has the requirement of building Power BI reports
that support multiple languages, it's no longer necessary to clone and
maintain a separate PBIX project file for each language. Instead, they
can increase reuse and lower report maintenance by designing and
implementing multi-language reports.

## Users Guide

Video provides a powerful way to help you prove your point. When you
click Online Video, you can paste in the embed code for the video you
want to add. You can also type a keyword to search online for the video
that best fits your document.

To make your document look professionally produced, Word provides
header, footer, cover page, and text box designs that complement each
other. For example, you can add a matching cover page, header, and
sidebar. Click Insert and then choose the elements you want from the
different galleries.

<img src="./images/TranslationsBuilder/media/image1.png"
style="width:5.89571in;height:1.76871in"
alt="Graphical user interface Description automatically generated" />

### Install Translations Builder

Video provides a powerful way to help you prove your point. When you
click Online Video, you can paste in the embed code for the video you
want to add. You can also type a keyword to search online for the video
that best fits your document.

To make your document look professionally produced, Word provides
header, footer, cover page, and text box designs that complement each
other. For example, you can add a matching cover page, header, and
sidebar. Click Insert and then choose the elements you want from the
different galleries.

### Using Translations Builder as an External Tool for Power BI Desktop

Themes and styles also help keep your document coordinated. When you
click Design and choose a new Theme, the pictures, charts, and SmartArt
graphics change to match your new theme. When you apply styles, your
headings change to match the new theme.

Save time in Word with new buttons that show up where you need them. To
change the way a picture fits in your document, click it and a button
for layout options appears next to it. When you work on a table, click
where you want to add a row or a column, and then click the plus sign.

Reading is easier, too, in the new Reading view. You can collapse parts
of the document and focus on the text you want. If you need to stop
reading before you reach the end, Word remembers where you left off -
even on another device.

### Adding a Secondary Culture

Video provides a powerful way to help you prove your point. When you
click Online Video, you can paste in the embed code for the video you
want to add. You can also type a keyword to search online for the video
that best fits your document.

<img src="./images/TranslationsBuilder/media/image2.png"
style="width:5.14724in;height:1.40384in"
alt="Graphical user interface, application Description automatically generated" />

Save time in Word with new buttons that show up where you need them. To
change the way a picture fits in your document, click it and a button
for layout options appears next to it. When you work on a table, click
where you want to add a row or a column, and then click the plus sign.

Reading is easier, too, in the new Reading view. You can collapse parts
of the document and focus on the text you want. If you need to stop
reading before you reach the end, Word remembers where you left off -
even on another device.

### Creating Translations by Hand

To make your document look professionally produced, Word provides
header, footer, cover page, and text box designs that complement each
other. For example, you can add a matching cover page, header, and
sidebar. Click Insert and then choose the elements you want from the
different galleries.

Themes and styles also help keep your document coordinated. When you
click Design and choose a new Theme, the pictures, charts, and SmartArt
graphics change to match your new theme. When you apply styles, your
headings change to match the new theme.

### Creating Machine Translations using the Azure Translation Service

To make your document look professionally produced, Word provides
header, footer, cover page, and text box designs that complement each
other. For example, you can add a matching cover page, header, and
sidebar. Click Insert and then choose the elements you want from the
different galleries.

<img src="./images/TranslationsBuilder/media/image3.png"
style="width:2.9026in;height:1.00547in"
alt="Graphical user interface, text, application Description automatically generated" />

Themes and styles also help keep your document coordinated. When you
click Design and choose a new Theme, the pictures, charts, and SmartArt
graphics change to match your new theme. When you apply styles, your
headings change to match the new theme.

<img src="./images/TranslationsBuilder/media/image4.png"
style="width:4.67485in;height:2.0894in"
alt="Application Description automatically generated with medium confidence" />

## Developers Guide
