## **Lab 01: Getting Started with Translation Builder**

**Overview**: In this lab, you will learn how Translations Builder
together with Power BI Desktop to build multi-language reports for Power
BI. You will start by downloading a PBIX project file named
**TB-Lab01.pbix** and opening it in Power BI Desktop. Once you have
opened **TB-Lab01.pbix,** you will launch Translations Builder and
practice by moving through the steps to add metadata translations and
report label translations. At various milestones in this lab, you will
be required to publish **TB-Lab01.pbix** from Power BI Desktop to the
Power BI Service so you can test how the translations you’ve added
appear to users when loaded using different languages and cultures.

**Prerequisite 1**: To complete this lab, you will need a Power BI
workspace where you have appropriate permissions to publish project from
Power BI Desktop to test your work. This workspace must also be
associated with a Premium capacity. That’s because Power BI translations
do no properly load for workspaces in the shared capacity.

**Prerequisite 2**: This lab assumes you’ve already installed
Translations Builder. If you haven’t installed Translations Builder yet,
you must follow steps in the [Translations Builder Installation
Guide](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder/blob/main/Docs/Installation%20Guide.md)
before continuing with these lab exercises.

### Exercise 1: Creating and Testing Metadata Translations

In this exercise, you will begin by downloading a PBIX file which
already has a simple data model and a single page report. You will then
publish the project to the Power BI Service to set up a process whereby
you can test out how your translations appear to report consumers.

1.  Download the PBIX starter file named **TB-Lab01.pbix** from the
    following link

<https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder/raw/main/Labs/StarterFiles/TB-Lab01.pbix>

2.  Create a new folder on your local hard drive for these lab exercises
    such as **C:\DevCampLabs\\**.

3.  Copy **TB-Lab01.pbix** into the lab folder and then open it in Power
    BI Desktop.

<img src="./images/Lab01/media/image1.png"
style="width:4.82449in;height:2.69189in"
alt="Graphical user interface, application, PowerPoint Description automatically generated" />

4.  Open

5.  cccc

### Exercise 2: Creating and Testing Report Label Translations

In this exercise ddddd

1.  Rub your belly

<!-- -->

6.  Tap your forehead
