## **Translations Builder Developers Guide**

Blah Blah Blah

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image1.png"
style="width:5.37946in;height:2.25987in"
alt="Graphical user interface, application Description automatically generated" />

Translations Builder is an external tool for Power BI Desktop that has
been developed using C#, .NET 6 and Windows Forms. Translations Builder
does its work by reading and writing to a dataset definition thatâ€™s been
loaded into a session of the Analysis Service engine running in Power BI
Desktop. Translations Builder uses the Tabular Object Model (TOM) to
perform read and write operations.

TOM allows your code to establish a direct connection to the model for a
dataset loaded into Power BI Desktop. This provides the most direct
approach for writing custom code to automate the process of managing
metadata translations within a Power BI dataset.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image2.png"
style="width:3.31132in;height:1.14068in"
alt="Diagram Description automatically generated" />

The **TranslationsBuilder** programs against TOM to automate adding
secondary cultures and metadata translations to a Power BI dataset. The
**TranslationsBuilder** application is similar to the Tabular Editor in
that it uses the .NET support for [Windows
Forms](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/desktop/winforms/overview/?view=netdesktop-5.0)
to provide an interactive user experience. You can open and run the
**TranslationsBuilder** project using Visual Studio 2022 or Visual
Studio Code if you'd like to examine the code inside or test this
application running inside the .NET debugger.

The high-level structure of the **TranslationsBuilder** project is shown
in the following screenshot. **TranslationsBuilder** is a desktop
application loads its primary form named **FormMain** at application
startup. In addition to **FormMain**, there are also a few other forms
in the project that are used as dialogs to interact with the application
user.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image3.png"
style="width:1.9693in;height:1.96488in"
alt="Graphical user interface, application Description automatically generated" />

The **TranslationsBuilder** project has been created using the [external
tools integration
support](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/power-bi/transform-model/desktop-external-tools)
for Power BI Desktop. Once the **TranslationsBuilder** application has
been deploy on a Windows computer, you can launch it directly from Power
BI Desktop using the **External Tools** tab in the ribbon.

You can deploy **TranslationsBuilder** as an external tool on a computer
where you've already installed Power BI Desktop. You deploy an external
tool by copying a JSON file with an extension of **pbitool.json** into a
well-known folder location which is inspected by Power BI Desktop at
startup. The **TranslationsBuilder** project contains a JSON deployment
file named **translationsbuilder.pbitool.json**.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image4.png"
style="width:6.86932in;height:1.33917in"
alt="A picture containing graphical user interface Description automatically generated" />

Let's walk through the steps to deploy **TranslationsBuilder** as an
external tool for Power BI Desktop, First, you must build the project to
generate the executable program file named **TranslationsBuilder.exe**.
Next, you must update the **path** property in
**translationsbuilder.pbitool.json** so it points to the location path
for **TranslationsBuilder.exe**. Third, you must copy the file named
**translationsbuilder.pbitool.json** to the **External Tools** folder
located at the following path.

C:\Program Files (x86)\Common Files\Microsoft Shared\Power BI
Desktop\External Tools

The **External Tools** folder might already contain other deployment
files for other external tools such as Tabular Editor.

Once you have copied the **translationsbuilder.pbitool.json** file to
the **External Tools** folder, the **TranslationsBuilder** tile should
appear in Power BI Desktop on the **External Tools** tab in the ribbon.
Note that you must restart Power BI Desktop before you can see the
effect. After a restart, you should see **TranslationsBuilder** in the
**External Tools** tab in the ribbon.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image5.png"
style="width:3.75987in;height:0.75499in"
alt="Graphical user interface, text Description automatically generated" />

When you launch an external tool like **TranslationsBuilder**, the
application is passed startup parameters including a connection string
which can be used to establish a connection back to the dataset that's
loaded in Power BI Desktop. This allows **TranslationsBuilder** to
display dataset information and to provide commands to automate adding
metadata translations. **TranslationsBuilder** also provides a table
grid down below which displays all the non-hidden dataset objects and
their associated metadata translations.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image6.png"
style="width:5.89571in;height:1.76871in"
alt="Graphical user interface Description automatically generated" />

### Program with TOM in an External Tool

**TranslationsBuilder** is a developer sample created to demonstrate
programming metadata translations using TOM. The **TranslationsBuilder**
project contains a C# class named
[TranslationsManager](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/Multilanguage-Reports/blob/main/TranslationsBuilder/Services/TranslationsManager.cs)
which contains the custom C# code which programs with TOM to create
secondary cultures and to add metadata translations.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image7.png"
style="width:3.21472in;height:2.32438in"
alt="A picture containing diagram Description automatically generated" />

Whenever you open a PBIX file with a dataset definition, Power BI
Desktop launches a local instance of Analysis Services. The programming
model of TOM provides a top-level **Server** object which you can think
of as your connection to a local instance of the Analysis Services. The
**Server** object provides a **Databases** collection of **Database**
objects. Each **Database** object has a **Model** property which
provides access to tables, cultures and metadata translations.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image8.png"
style="width:1.90345in;height:1.09202in"
alt="Chart Description automatically generated" />

Each time Power BI Desktop starts a local instance of Analysis Service
to load a dataset, it assigns what seems like a random port number (e.g.
**50001**). You can construct a connection string using a path of
**localhost** followed by the port number in a format that follows the
pattern of **localhost:50001**. Once you know the port number of the
local instance of Analysis Services, you can connect to the dataset
loaded in that instance using the following code.

// connect to local Analysis Services engine running in Power BI Desktop
session

Server server = new Server();

server.Connect("localhost:50001");

// With Power BI Desktop, server will contain extactly one database

Database dataset = server.Databases\[0\];

Model model = server.Databases\[0\].Model;

When using TOM to connect to Power BI Desktop, the **Databases**
collection will always contain a single **Database** object. Therefore,
you can access the **Database** object representing a dataset loaded
into Power BI Desktop using **Datasets\[0\]**. Things are different when
using TOM to connect to a workspace in the Power BI Service. In this
case the **Server** object represents a Power BI workspace which can
have more than one dataset. In this case, the **Datasets** collection
can have more than one dataset so the syntax of **Datasets\[0\]** cannot
be used reliably. Instead, you must access datasets by name.

Now let's examine how an external tool like **TranslationsBuilder** is
able to obtain the connection string to connect to the **Server**
object. When Power BI Desktop launches an external tool, it passes
startup parameters which a connection string for the **Server** object
and the **Database** name which is passed as a GUID.

Since **TranslationsBuilder** has been deployed as an **External Tool**,
the application can examine its startup parameters to dynamically
discover the **Server** connect string. The **TranslationsManager**
class provides a [static
constructor](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/Multilanguage-Reports/blob/main/TranslationsBuilder/Services/TranslationsManager.cs#L19)
that uses properties of the **AppSettings** class to initialize the a
**Server** object and a **Model** object for the dataset that's open in
the current session of Power BI Desktop.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image9.png"
style="width:3.26255in;height:1.85714in"
alt="Graphical user interface, text Description automatically generated" />

Once you acquire a reference to the **Model** object, it can be used to
access dataset objects of type **Table**, **Column**, **Measure**,
**Hierarchy** and **Level**. The **Model** contains a **Tables**
collection. Each **Table** object contains three collections named
**Columns**, **Measures** and **Hierarchies**. A **Hierarchy** object
contains a **Levels** collection with **Level** objects.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image10.png"
style="width:1.69061in;height:1.24286in" />

You can enumerate through the **Tables** collection of a **Model**
object to discover what tables exist in a dataset definition. Within a
**Table** object, you can further enumerate through three collections
named **Columns**, **Measures** and **Hierarchies**. With a
**Hierarchy** object, you can enumerate through the **Levels**
collection to access **Level** objects.

foreach (Table table in model.Tables) {

// (1) enumerate through tables one by one

Console.WriteLine("Table: " + table.Name);

// (2) enumerate through columns

foreach (Column column in table.Columns) {

Console.WriteLine("Column: " + column.Name);

};

// (3) enumerate through measures

foreach (Measure measure in table.Measures) {

Console.WriteLine("Measure: " + measure.Name);

};

// (4) enumerate through hierarchies

foreach (Hierarchy hierarchy in table.Hierarchies) {

Console.WriteLine("Hierarchy: " + hierarchy.Name);

// (5) enumerate through hierarchy levels

foreach(Level level in hierarchy.Levels) {

Console.WriteLine("Hierarchy: " + level.Name);

}

};

}

It is important that you understand how to enumerate tables, columns,
measures, hierarchies and levels in this fashion when you need to add
metadata translations. That's because **Table**, **Column**,
**Measure**, **Hierarchy** and **Level** objects are the primary types
of dataset objects which will require you to add metadata translations.

The **TranslationsBuilder** application has been designed to store and
retrieve persistent application settings using the [Application Settings
support in Windows
Forms](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/desktop/winforms/advanced/application-settings-for-windows-forms?view=netframeworkdesktop-4.8).
The **TranslationsBuilder** application provides a top-level
**AppSettings** class with a set of static properties as shown in the
following screenshot. If you are curious, you can examine the
implementation of these static properties in the
[AppSettings](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/Multilanguage-Reports/blob/main/TranslationsBuilder/AppSettings.cs#L10)
class to see how to store and retrieve persistent property settings in a
desktop application created using .NET.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image11.png"
style="width:3.53771in;height:2.67532in"
alt="Graphical user interface, text, application Description automatically generated" />

The **Server** property and **Database** property are used to track the
target dataset to open. There are two other properties named
**TranslationsOutboxFolderPath** and **TranslationsInboxFolderPath**
which allow the user to customize where translation files are stored in
the file system of the local computer. There are also two addition
properties named **AzureTranslatorServiceKey** and
**AzureTranslatorServiceLocation** used to store credentials for
communicating with the Microsoft Translator service. The purpose of all
of these properties in the **AppSettings** class will be explained in
later sections of this article.

The **TranslationsBuilder** application makes it possible for a user to
modify any of these application settings by invoking the **Configure
Settingsâ€¦** command from the **Settings** menu to display the
**Configuration Options** dialog.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image12.png"
style="width:2.9026in;height:1.00547in"
alt="Graphical user interface, text, application Description automatically generated" />

The **Configuration Options** dialog interacts with the user using a
simple form which can be used to view or update any of the application
settings. There is also a **Save Changes** button which allows the user
to persist their changes locally.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image13.png"
style="width:4.67485in;height:2.0894in"
alt="Application Description automatically generated with medium confidence" />

### Use Annotations to Store Custom Property Values

Before diving further into programming metadata translations, it's time
to examine using the [Annotations
feature](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.analysisservices.tabular.annotation?view=analysisservices-dotnet)
made available through TOM. Let's begin by asking a simple question.
***What is an annotation?***

You can think of an annotation as a custom property or custom tag that
you add into a dataset definition. You can add an annotation to a
dataset object such as a **Table**, **Column**, **Measure**,
**Hierarchy** or **Level**. You can also add an annotation directly to
the **Model** object if you'd like to create a custom property that is
tracked at the dataset level. Here's an example of creating a new
**Annotation** object and adding it to the **Annotations** collection of
the **Model** object.

Annotation annotation1 = new Annotation { Name = "MyFirstAnnotation",
Value = "Hello Annotations" }

model.Annotations.Add(annotation1);

model.SaveChanges();

As you can see, an annotation is really just a name/value pair that can
be added to a dataset object to create a custom property. The use of
annotations can lead to innovative designs where you're able to track
whatever custom metadata you need within a dataset definition. The
**TranslationsBuilder** application demonstrates the use of annotations
by adding support to track a friendly dataset name so users do not have
to rely upon dataset names in the form of GUIDs.

If you examine the code inside the **TranslationsManager** class, you
can see it contains a const string field named
[DatasetAnnotationName](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/Multilanguage-Reports/blob/main/TranslationsBuilder/Services/TranslationsManager.cs#L27)
and a static property named
[DatasetName](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/Multilanguage-Reports/blob/main/TranslationsBuilder/Services/TranslationsManager.cs#L29)
as shown in the following code listing.

const string DatasetAnnotationName = "FriendlyDatasetName";

public static string DatasetName {

get {

if (model.Annotations.Contains(DatasetAnnotationName)) {

return model.Annotations\[DatasetAnnotationName\].Value;

}

else {

return model.Database.Name;

}

}

set {

if (model.Annotations.Contains(DatasetAnnotationName)) {

model.Annotations\[DatasetAnnotationName\].Value = value;

}

else {

model.Annotations.Add(new Annotation { Name = DatasetAnnotationName,
Value = value});

}

model.SaveChanges();

}

}

Now that you have seen the completed implementation of the
**DatasetName** property, let's review the code in the **get** block and
the **set** block so you can see the general pattern involved when
programming annotations with TOM.

The **get** block of the **DatasetName** property checks to see if an
annotation with a name of **FriendlyDatasetName** has already been
created. If the annotation exists, the property returns the **Value**
property of the **Annotation** object. If there is no **Annotation**
with the name of **FriendlyDatasetName**, the property implementation
falls back on the **Name** property of the **Database** object which is
typically tracked using the less-than-friendly GUID value.

get {

if (model.Annotations.Contains(DatasetAnnotationName)) {

return model.Annotations\[DatasetAnnotationName\].Value;

}

else {

return model.Database.Name;

}

}

The **set** block of the **DatasetName** property has been written to
update the annotation value. As you can see from the following code, you
must first determine whether the annotation already exists. If the
annotation exists, you update its **Value** property. If the annotation
does not yet exist, you must create a new **Annotation** object and add
it to the **Annotations** collection of the **Model** object.

set {

if (model.Annotations.Contains(DatasetAnnotationName)) {

model.Annotations\[DatasetAnnotationName\].Value = value;

}

else {

model.Annotations.Add(new Annotation { Name = DatasetAnnotationName,
Value = value});

}

model.SaveChanges();

}

**IMPORTANAT**: Calling **SaveChanges** only updates the dataset loaded
into memory in a session of Power BI Desktop. You must go to Power BI
Desktop and save your work there for the changes to be persisted to the
underlying PBIX file.

When you add an annotation in this fashion, the annotation becomes part
of the metadata for the dataset definition. The following screenshot
shows how this annotation is serialized within the **BIM** file for a
dataset definition.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image14.png"
style="width:7.46158in;height:2.83333in"
alt="Text, letter Description automatically generated" />

From this screenshot, you can see that Power BI Desktop uses annotations
to track its own custom properties within a dataset definition with
annotations such as **PBIDesktopVersion**, **PBI_QueryOrder** and
**\_\_PBI_TimeIntelligenceEnabled**.

Now, let's examine how using an annotation like this can improve the
user experience of an external tool. When you first open a dataset in
the **TranslationsBuilder** application, the **Dataset** name will be
displayed as a GUID value.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image15.png"
style="width:4.42983in;height:1.66814in"
alt="Graphical user interface, application Description automatically generated" />

The vast majority of humans have trouble memorizing or recognizing GUID
values and would generally prefer more friendly names. Therefore, the
**TranslationsBuilder** application provides the ability to replace the
GUID for the dataset name with a more friendly name. To change the
dataset name, you can invoke the **Set Friendly Dataset Name** command
from the **Settings** menu to display the **Set Dataset Name** dialog.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image16.png"
style="width:3.54386in;height:1.35607in"
alt="Graphical user interface, text, application Description automatically generated" />

When promoted by the **Set Dataset Name** dialog, you can add a friendly
dataset name and then click **Save**.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image17.png"
style="width:3.79825in;height:0.8977in"
alt="Rectangle Description automatically generated with low confidence" />

When you click **Save**, the **TranslationsBuilder** application will
save the **Name** value as an annotation and display this friendly name
instead of the GUID.

<img src="./images/DeveloperGuide/media/image18.png"
style="width:2.83004in;height:1.45268in"
alt="Graphical user interface, application Description automatically generated" />

Remember TOM code can update the dataset loaded into memory in Power BI
Desktop. However, it cannot persist the changes to the underlying PBIX
file. You must save your changes to in Power BI Desktop to update the
PBIX file.
